Document auto-import images feature (#430)
k3s-io/docs: docs/import-images.md

---
title: "Import images"
---

Container images are cached locally on each node by the containerd image store. Images can be pulled from the registry as needed by pods, preloaded via image pull, or imported from an image tarball.

## On-demand image pulling

Kubernetes, by default, automatically pulls images when a Pod requires them if the image is not already present on the node. This behavior can be changed by using the [image pull policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/images/#image-pull-policy) field of the Pod. When using the default `IfNotPresent` policy, containerd will pull the image from either upstream (default) or your [private registry](installation/private-registry.md) and store it in its image store. Users do not need to apply any additional configuration for on-demand image pulling to work.

## Pre-import images
:::info Version Gate
The pre-importing of images while K3s is running feature is available as of January 2025 releases: v1.32.0+k3s1, v1.31.5+k3s1, v1.30.9+k3s1, v1.29.13+k3s1. Before that, K3s pre-imported the images only when booting.
:::

> Pre-importing images onto the node is essential if you configure Kubernetes' `imagePullPolicy` as `Never`, for example, for security reasons. Another reason to do this is to reduce the time it takes for your K3s nodes to spin up.

Author: That reads better, thanks Derek

## Pre-import images
:::info Version Gate
The pre-importing of images while K3s is running feature is available as of January 2025 releases: v1.32.0+k3s1, v1.31.5+k3s1, v1.30.9+k3s1, v1.29.13+k3s1. Before that, K3s pre-imported the images only when booting.
:::

Pre-importing images onto the node is essential if you configure Kubernetes' `imagePullPolicy` as `Never`, for example, for security reasons. Another reason to do this is to reduce the time it takes for your K3s nodes to spin up.

K3s includes two mechanisms to pre-import images into the containerd image store:

<Tabs groupId = "import images" queryString>
<TabItem value="Online image importing" default>

> Users can trigger the pulling of images into the containerd image store by adding a `.txt` file containing the image paths to the `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images` directory while K3s is running. A K3s controller will detect this file and trigger the image pull from an upstream (default) or [private registry](installation/private-registry.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can trigger a pull of images into the containerd image store by placing a `.txt` file containing the image names, one per line, in the `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images` directory. The text file can be placed before K3s is started, or created/modified while K3s is running. K3s will sequentially pull the images via the CRI API, respecting the using the configuration from [`registries.yaml`](installation/private-registry.md).
```

Author: Thanks, I slightly modified the last sentence

For example:

```bash
mkdir /var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images
cp example.txt /var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images
```

Where `example.txt` contains:

```
docker.io/library/redis:latest
docker.io/library/mysql:latest
```

After a few seconds, the `redis` and the `mysql` images will be available in the containerd image store of the node. 

Use `sudo k3s ctr images list` to query the containerd image store.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Offline image importing">

> Users can import images offline to containerd by adding image tarballs in the directory `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images` while K3s is running. A K3s controller will detect the image tarball, extract the images and store them in the containerd image store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can import image content directly into the containerd image store by placing image tarballs in the `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images` directory. The tarball can be placed before K3s is started, or created/modified while K3s is running. K3s will decompress the image tarball if necessary, extract the images, and load them into the containerd image store.
```

Author: Thanks

For example:

```bash
mkdir /var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images
curl  https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/releases/download/v1.33.1%2Bk3s1/k3s-airgap-images-amd64.tar.zst -O  /var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images/k3s-airgap-images-amd64.tar.zst
```

After a few seconds, the images included in the image tarball will be available in the containerd image store of the node. 

Use `sudo k3s ctr images list` to query the containerd image store.

:::warning

> When using the offline image importing for Airgap, tarballs should be present before K3s starts. Please follow the [airgap install documentation](installation/airgap.md) for detailed information

Reviewer: Maybe say why this is the case? Its fine if users want to add them later, just the pods will be stuck in ImagePullBackoff until they make the images available.

:::

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Set up an image registry

K3s supports two alternatives for image registries:

> * [Private Registry Configuration](installation/private-registry.md) covers use of `registries.yaml` to configure container image registry mirrors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Private Registry Configuration](installation/private-registry.md) covers use of `registries.yaml` to configure container image registry authentication and mirroring.
```

> * [Embedded Registry Mirror](installation/registry-mirror.md) shows how to enable the embedded distributed image registry mirror.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Embedded Registry Mirror](installation/registry-mirror.md) shows how to enable the embedded distributed image registry mirror, for peer-to-peer sharing of images between nodes.
```

---
title: "Import images"
---

> A container image represents binary data that encapsulates an application and all its software dependencies. Container images are self-contained, executable software bundles that can run standalone and make well-defined assumptions about their runtime environment. Container images for an application are typically created and then pushed to a registry. K3s, as a CNCF-certified Kubernetes distribution, relies on containerd to pull the required images for Pods to run correctly.

Reviewer: Do we need to start out with a paragraph describing what images are and how they are used?

Author: I thought it might be useful for newbies but I guess everyone should understand images when they come to these docs

> There are two ways to get images onto your nodes so that Pods can utilize them: pulling them on-demand or pre-importing them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Container images are cached locally on each node by the containerd image store. Images can be pulled from the registry as needed by pods, preloaded via image pull, or imported from an image tarball.
```

Author: Thanks Brad. Your suggestions read always much better!

## Pre-import images
:::info Version Gate
The pre-importing of images while K3s is running feature is available as of January 2025 releases: v1.32.0+k3s1, v1.31.5+k3s1, v1.30.9+k3s1, v1.29.13+k3s1. Before that, K3s pre-imported the images only when booting.
:::

Pre-importing images onto the node is essential if you configure Kubernetes' `imagePullPolicy` as `Never`, for example, for security reasons. Another reason to do this is to reduce the time it takes for your K3s nodes to spin up.

K3s includes two mechanisms to pre-import images into the containerd image store:

<Tabs groupId = "import images" queryString>
<TabItem value="Online image importing" default>

> Users can trigger the pulling of images into the containerd image store by adding a `.txt` file containing the image paths to the `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images` directory while K3s is running. A K3s controller will detect this file and trigger the image pull from an upstream (default) or [private registry](./installation/private-registry.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can trigger a pull of images into the containerd image store by creating a `.txt` file containing the image names within the `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/agent/images` directory. The text file can be created before K3s is started, or created/modified while K3s is running. Images will be pulled from the registry using the registry configuration defined in [`registries.yaml`](./installation/private-registry.md).
```
